Add Secure Connections Standard (#548)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-0114-v1-secure-connections.md

---
title: Secure Connections
type: Standard  # | Decision Record | Procedural
status: Draft
track: IaaS  # | IaaS | Ops | KaaS | IAM
---

## Introduction

A lot of internal and external connectivity is established to and within a cloud infrastructure.
Due to the nature of the IaaS approach, many communication channels may occasionally or even primarily carry potentially sensitive data of customers.
To protect this data from both tampering and unintended disclosure, communication channels need to be properly secured.

> For this reason, [SCS](https://scs.community) standardizes the use of common protection mechanisms for communication channels in OpenStack infrastructures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this reason, [SCS project](https://scs.community) standardizes the use of common protection mechanisms for communication channels in OpenStack infrastructures.
```

## Motivation

As mentioned above, a lot of communication channels in an OpenStack infrastructure carry data that is potentially sensitive.
For example this includes authentication data of customers and internal OpenStack configuration data such as encryption keys among others.
OpenStack does not generically mandate or preconfigure the use of specific protection mechanisms by itself and instead only makes recommendations about best practices in its offical [Security Guide](https://docs.openstack.org/security-guide/).

> To address the potential lack of implementation of such mechanisms by a CSP and to establish a reliable foundation for communication data protection in SCS clouds, SCS formulates this standard for securing communication channels in the infrastructure, so that a customer can rely on adequate security mechanisms being in use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address the potential lack of implementation of such mechanisms by a Cloud Service Provider and to establish a reliable foundation for communication data protection in SCS clouds, SCS project formulates this standard for securing communication channels in the infrastructure, so that a customer can rely on adequate security mechanisms being in use.
```

## Design Considerations

There are many communication channels in OpenStack with different characteristics, location and eligible means of protection.

> Not all channels are equally easy to secure and some protection mechanisms might put unbearable burdens on a CSP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all channels are equally easy to secure and some protection mechanisms might put unbearable burdens on a Cloud Service Providers.
```

> Hence, careful assessment is required to determine for which SCS will either mandate or recommend the use of a protection mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hence, careful assessment is required to determine for which SCS project will either mandate or recommend the use of a protection mechanism.
```

8. Neutron's internal network traffic is one of the hardest aspects to address. Due to the highly dynamic nature of SDN, connection endpoints and relations are constantly changing. There is no holistic approach currently offered or recommended by OpenStack itself. IPsec could be established between all involved nodes but requires sophisticated and reliable key management. A per-tenant/per-customer encryption is very hard to establish this way.

### Options considered

#### Option 1: fully mandate securing all channels without differentiation

This option would reach the highest security standard and establish protection on all identified communication channels simultaneously.
However, this would burden CSPs greatly due to the difficulty of addressing some of the channels and properly maintaining the solution.
Also there is a risk of making this incompatible with existing infrastructures due to some of their specifics being mutually exclusive to the more intricate protection mechanisms such as cross-node IPsec configurations.

> As a third aspect, not all mechanisms might fulfill the CSPs requirements regarding performance and stability and SCS cannot in good faith force CSPs to use technologies not suited to their infrastructures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a third aspect, not all mechanisms might fulfill the Cloud Service Providers requirements regarding performance and stability and SCS project cannot in good faith force Cloud Service Providers to use technologies not suited to their infrastructures.
```

This seems like a bad option from many perspectives.

> It also allows very little flexibility and might even make SCS conformance unappealing to CSPs due to the immense effort required to reach it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also allows very little flexibility and might even make SCS conformance unappealing to Cloud Service Providerss due to the immense effort required to reach it.
```

#### Option 2: only make recommendations

> This option would limit SCS to only recommend mechanisms in this standard like presented in the OpenStack Security Guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option would limit this SCS standard to only recommend mechanisms in this standard like presented in the OpenStack Security Guide.
```

Although this can increase awareness about the best practices recommended by OpenStack and maybe encourage CSPs to abide by them, it would actually contribute very little to the security baseline of SCS infrastructures as a whole since everything would stay optional.

This option would be very easy to standardize and get consensus on due to its lightweight and optional nature.
However, the actual added value for SCS is questionable at best.

#### Option 3: mix recommendations and obligations

This option forms a middle ground between options 1 and 2.
For this, the standard needs to carefully assess each communication channel, mechanisms for protecting it and the effort required to do so as well as the implications.
Then, only for mechanisms that are known to be reliable, are feasible to implement and for which the benefits clearly outweigh the integration effort required, should this standard enforce their implementation in a permissive way.

> For any remaining mechanisms SCS should only make recommendations and refer to known best practices where applicable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For any remaining mechanisms SCS project should only make recommendations and refer to known best practices where applicable.
```

This option would still offer improvements over arbitrary OpenStack clouds by establishing a baseline that goes beyond mere recommendations while still taking into account that not all communication channels are equally easy to secure and allowing necessary flexibility for the CSP.

## Open questions

### Verifying standard conformance for internal mechanisms

> Most of the mentioned communication channels to be secured are part of the internal IaaS infrastructure of an SCS cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the mentioned communication channels to be secured are part of the internal IaaS infrastructure of a SCS cloud.
```

> When an internal protection mechanism is implemented by the CSP it cannot be verified from outside of the infrastructure without administrative access to the infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When an internal protection mechanism is implemented by the Cloud Service Provider it cannot be verified from outside of the infrastructure without administrative access to the infrastructure.
```

> Thus, the SCS community is unable to fully assess a CSPs conformance to this standard without a dedicated audit of the infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, the SCS community is unable to fully assess a Cloud Service Providers' conformance to this standard without a dedicated audit of the infrastructure.
```

---
title: Secure Connections
type: Standard  # | Decision Record | Procedural
status: Draft
track: IaaS  # | IaaS | Ops | KaaS | IAM
---

<!---
This is a template striving to provide a starting point for
creating a standard or decision record adhering to scs-0001.
Replace at least all text which is _italic_.
See https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/blob/main/Standards/scs-0001-v1-sovereign-cloud-standards.md

> --->

Author: Done.

| 8 | Internal Neutron network traffic | Traffic within Neutron SDN networks exchanged between internal systems such as network/controller and compute nodes | IPsec |

Notes about the classification categories and implications:

1. Most database clustering solutions (e.g. MariaDB Galera) offer TLS-based encryption of their backend channels. This needs no additional configuration in OpenStack and is a configuration solely concerning the database cluster.
2. The database frontend interface is the primary connection target for the OpenStack services. OpenStack supports using TLS for database connections.
3. For the message queue, AMQP-based solutions such as RabbitMQ and QPid do offer TLS natively which is also supported by OpenStack. ZeroMQ does not and requires IPsec or CIPSO instead.
4. External API endpoints can be protected easily by using a TLS proxy. They can then be registered with their HTTPS endpoint in the Keystone service catalog. The certificates of external APIs usually need to be signed by a well-known CA in order to be accepted by arbitrary external clients.

> 5. Internal API endpoints can use the same TLS proxy mechanisms as the internal ones. Optionally, the TLS certificate provider and PKI can differ to the internal ones. It is often sufficient for the CA of internal TLS endpoints to be accepted within the infrastructure and doesn't need to be a common public CA.

Reviewer 2: "Internal API endpoints can use the same TLS proxy mechanisms as the internal ones."
Did you mean "Internal API endpoints can use the same TLS proxy mechanisms as the external ones."?
The whole point leaves me a little bit confused, maybe it is just the wording :)

Author: Yes, this was a copy/paste error, well spotted! I rephrased it for better clarity.

6. For protecting the data transferred between compute nodes during live-migration of VMs, [Nova offers support for QEMU-native TLS](https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/admin/secure-live-migration-with-qemu-native-tls.html). As an alternative, SSH is also a channel that Nova can be configured to use between hosts for this but requires passwordless SSH keys with root access to all other compute nodes which in turn requires further hardening.
7. Neutron's external network traffic leaves the IaaS infrastructure. This part is twofold: connections initiated by the VMs themselves (egress) and connections reaching VMs from the outside (ingress). The CSP cannot influence the egress connections but can offer VPNaaS for the ingress direction.

> 8. Neutron's internal network traffic one of the hardest aspects to address. Due to the highly dynamic nature of SDN, connection endpoints and relations are constantly changing. There is no holistic approach currently offered or recommended by OpenStack itself. IPsec could be established between all involved nodes but requires sophisticated and reliable key management. A per-tenant/per-customer encryption is very hard to establish this way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
8. Neutron's internal network traffic is one of the hardest aspects to address. Due to the highly dynamic nature of SDN, connection endpoints and relations are constantly changing. There is no holistic approach currently offered or recommended by OpenStack itself. IPsec could be established between all involved nodes but requires sophisticated and reliable key management. A per-tenant/per-customer encryption is very hard to establish this way.
```

  - If using Qpid, the OpenStack services' oslo.messaging configuration for Qpid MUST set the `qpid_protocol` option to `ssl` to enable SSL.
- If using Apache Kafka, the server listener MUST be configured to accept SSL connections. See [Apache Kafka Listener Configuration](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#listener_configuration).
  - The OpenStack services' oslo.messaging configuration for Kafka MUST specify `security_protocol` as either `SSL` or `SASL_SSL` and the related options appropriately. See [Kafka Driver Options](https://docs.openstack.org/oslo.messaging/latest/admin/kafka.html#driver-options).

### Hypervisor and Live Migration Connections

- If using libvirt on compute nodes, the libvirt port (as per `listen_addr`) MUST NOT be exposed to the network in an unauthenticated and unprotected fashion. It SHOULD be bound to `127.0.0.1`.
- If QEMU and libvirt are used as the hypervisor interface in Nova, QEMU-native TLS SHOULD be used. See [Secure live migration with QEMU-native TLS](https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/admin/secure-live-migration-with-qemu-native-tls.html).

### External VM Connections

> - As an OPTIONAL measure to assist customers in protecting external connections to their OpenStack networks and VMs, the Neutron VPNaaS service MAY be integrated into the infrastructure and the Neutron VPNaaS API extension offered to users. See the [Neutron VPNaaS documentation](https://docs.openstack.org/neutron-vpnaas/latest/).

Reviewer 2: Would it be okay to "allow" also other VPN-Endpoints? As long as this part of the standard is optional I would not see problem in allowing also other mechanisms.

Author: I rephrased the section in a more generic manner and mention Neutron's VPNaaS as an example now.

- As an OPTIONAL measure to protect Neutron SDN traffic between physical nodes within the infrastructure, IPsec tunnels MAY be established between nodes involved in Neutron networks, such as compute and network controller nodes, at the network interfaces configured in Neutron.

## Related Documents

- [OpenStack Security Guide](https://docs.openstack.org/security-guide/)
  - [OpenStack Security Guide: Secure communication](https://docs.openstack.org/security-guide/secure-communication.html)
  - [OpenStack Security Guide: Database transport security](https://docs.openstack.org/security-guide/databases/database-transport-security.html)
  - [OpenStack Security Guide: Messaging transport security](https://docs.openstack.org/security-guide/messaging/security.html#messaging-transport-security)
- [Nova Documentation: Secure live migration with QEMU-native TLS](https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/admin/secure-live-migration-with-qemu-native-tls.html)
- [Guide to TLS Standards Compliance](https://www.ssl.com/guide/tls-standards-compliance/)

## Conformance Tests

Conformance tests are limited to communication channels exposed to users, such as the public API interfaces.

> 

Reviewer 2: What would be necessary to test here besides the exposed channels?
RPC and DB? Maybe Libvirt? - Can we audit this somehow? Maybe an tcp-dump looking for such traffic?

However we will decide on this - it should also be documented here, so CSPs will know how to deal with possible audits.

Author: Essentially everything that mentions a "MUST" or "MUST NOT" in this standard, except for the external API.

- AMQP/RPC
- SQL/DB
- internal API
- Libvirt port

Most of it could be determined based on a network traffic recording (e.g. tcpdump) by looking at the port numbers and traffic in conjunction with the target addresses/ports configured in the OpenStack `*.conf`s. For the Libvirt port exposure, a `netstat` on the compute nodes might help or simply `grep`'ing the Libvirt configuration for `listen_addr`.

Most of this is deep in the infrastructure though. A filtered network capture might work but I don't think CSPs would be especially happy about it.

Is there any existing standard where non-external audit is proposed? I'm unsure how to tackle this in the standard.

Reviewer: At least, standard should mention, that conformance tests do only check external endpoints. Internal endpoints MUST be checked with manual audits. We will have manual audits in other conformance tests as well. E.g. in #555, we investigate, how to check flavor implementation and I guess, manual audits are required in this context, too. In favor to of this PR, I suggest to open a new issue to propose a general concept for manual audits.

Reviewer 2: I agree with Anja, we need a central place for manual audits. And a document that includes all necessary checks, so any auditor can simply follow through.

Author: > At least, standard should mention, that conformance tests do only check external endpoints. Internal endpoints MUST be checked with manual audits.

I added more emphasis on this with an additional sentence.

> In favor to of this PR, I suggest to open a new issue to propose a general concept for manual audits.

> I agree with Anja, we need a central place for manual audits.

https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/issues/611

> <!-- TODO: implement public API tests checking the TLS handshakes including cipher suites etc. -->

Reviewer 2: delete this comment please

Author: Did this right after I implemented and pushed the test suite to the branch :)

> ---

Author: Done.
